"ALOHA" redirects here. For the Hawaiian word, see Aloha. For other uses, see Aloha (disambiguation).
ALOHAnet, also known as the ALOHA System,[1][2][3] or simply ALOHA, was a pioneering computer networking system developed at the University of Hawaii.

The ALOHAnet used a new method of medium access, called ALOHA random access, and experimental ultra high frequency (UHF) for its operation. In its simplest form, later known as Pure ALOHA, remote units communicated with a base station (Menehune) over two separate radio frequencies (for inbound and outbound respectively). Nodes did not wait for the channel to be clear before sending, but instead waited for acknowledgement of successful receipt of a message, and re-sent it if this was not received. Nodes would also stop and re-transmit data if they detected any other messages while transmitting. While simple to implement, this results in an efficiency of only 18.4%. A later advancement, Slotted ALOHA, improved the efficiency of the protocol by reducing the chance of collision, improving throughput to 36.8%.

ALOHAnet became operational in June 1971, providing the first public demonstration of a wireless packet data network.[4][5]

ALOHA was subsequently employed in the Ethernet cable based network in the 1970s, and following regulatory developments in the early 1980s it became possible to use the ALOHA random-access techniques in both Wi-Fi and in mobile telephone networks. ALOHA channels were used in a limited way in the 1980s in 1G mobile phones for signaling and control purposes. In the late 1980s, the European standardization group GSM who worked on the Pan-European Digital mobile communication system GSM greatly expanded the use of ALOHA channels for access to radio channels in mobile telephony. In the early 2000s additional ALOHA channels were added to 2.5G and 3G mobile phones with the widespread introduction of General Packet Radio Service (GPRS), using a slotted-ALOHA random-access channel combined with a version of the Reservation ALOHA scheme first analyzed by a group at BBN Technologies.

History
One of the early computer networking designs, development of the ALOHA network was begun in September 1968 at the University of Hawaii under the leadership of Norman Abramson and Franklin Kuo, along with Thomas Gaarder, Shu Lin, Wesley Peterson and Edward ("Ned") Weldon. The goal was to use low-cost commercial radio equipment to connect users on Oahu and the other Hawaiian islands with a central time-sharing computer on the main Oahu campus. The first packet broadcasting unit went into operation in June 1971. Terminals were connected to a special purpose terminal connection unit using RS-232 at 9600 bit/s.[6]